Turn SQL check operators guide into a tutorial using the ADE example (#2515)
astronomer/docs: learn/airflow-sql-data-quality.md

          FROM (SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT(bird_name)) AS bird_name_distinct_check FROM birds WHERE bird_name IS NOT NULL) AS sq
      UNION ALL
          SELECT 'observation_year' AS col_name, 'max' AS check_type, observation_year_max AS check_result
          FROM (SELECT MAX(observation_year) AS observation_year_max FROM birds WHERE bird_name IS NOT NULL) AS sq
      UNION ALL
          SELECT 'bird_happiness' AS col_name, 'min' AS check_type, bird_happiness_min AS check_result
          FROM (SELECT MIN(bird_happiness) AS bird_happiness_min FROM birds WHERE bird_name IS NOT NULL) AS sq
      UNION ALL
          SELECT 'bird_happiness' AS col_name, 'max' AS check_type, bird_happiness_max AS check_result
          FROM (SELECT MAX(bird_happiness) AS bird_happiness_max FROM birds WHERE bird_name IS NOT NULL) AS sq
      ) AS check_columns, parameters: None
    [2023-07-04, 11:18:01 UTC] {sql.py:397} INFO - Record: [('bird_name', 'null_check', 0), ('bird_name', 'distinct_check', 4), ('observation_year', 'max', 2022), ('bird_happiness', 'min', 8), ('bird_happiness', 'max', 10)]
    [2023-07-04, 11:18:01 UTC] {sql.py:420} INFO - All tests have passed
    ```

## How it works

> The SQL check operators abstract SQL queries to streamline data quality checks. One difference between the SQL check operators and the standard [`BaseSQLOperator`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/2.2.0/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.BaseSQLOperator) is that the SQL check operators respond with a boolean, meaning the task fails when any of the resulting queries fail. This is particularly helpful for stopping a data pipeline before bad data makes it to a given destination. The lines of code and values that fail the check are observable in the Airflow logs.

Author: ```suggestion
The SQL check operators abstract SQL queries to streamline data quality checks. One difference between the SQL check operators and the standard [`BaseSQLOperator`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/stable/_api/airflow/providers/common/sql/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.providers.common.sql.operators.sql.BaseSQLOperator) is that the SQL check operators respond with a boolean, meaning the task fails when any of the resulting queries fail. This is particularly helpful for stopping a data pipeline before bad data makes it to a given destination. The lines of code and values that fail the check are observable in the Airflow logs.
```

This tutorial shows how to use three SQL check operators (SQLColumnCheckOperator, SQLTableCheckOperator and SQLCheckOperator) to build a robust data quality suite for your DAGs.

:::info

You can find more examples of data quality checks in pipelines in the [data quality demo repository](https://github.com/astronomer/airflow-data-quality-demo/).

:::

## Time to complete

This tutorial takes approximately 30 minutes to complete.

## Assumed knowledge

To get the most out of this tutorial, you should have an understanding of:

- How to design a data quality process. See [Data quality and Airflow](data-quality.md).
- Running SQL from Airflow. See [Using Airflow to execute SQL](airflow-sql.md).

## Prerequisites

- The [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/overview).
- Access to a relational database. You can use an in-memory SQLite database for which you'll need to install the [SQLite provider](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-sqlite/versions/latest). Note that currently the operators cannot support BigQuery `job_id`s.

> - A love for birds.

Reviewer: I almost edited out because I have been attacked several times by redwing blackbirds while cycling, but learned to forgive and forget in order to follow this tutorial.

## Step 1: Configure your Astro project

To use SQL check operators, install the [Common SQL provider](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/versions/latest) in your Astro project.

> 1. Create a new Astro project:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Run the following commands to create a new Astro project:
```

          FROM (SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT(bird_name)) AS bird_name_distinct_check FROM birds WHERE bird_name IS NOT NULL) AS sq
      UNION ALL
          SELECT 'observation_year' AS col_name, 'max' AS check_type, observation_year_max AS check_result
          FROM (SELECT MAX(observation_year) AS observation_year_max FROM birds WHERE bird_name IS NOT NULL) AS sq
      UNION ALL
          SELECT 'bird_happiness' AS col_name, 'min' AS check_type, bird_happiness_min AS check_result
          FROM (SELECT MIN(bird_happiness) AS bird_happiness_min FROM birds WHERE bird_name IS NOT NULL) AS sq
      UNION ALL
          SELECT 'bird_happiness' AS col_name, 'max' AS check_type, bird_happiness_max AS check_result
          FROM (SELECT MAX(bird_happiness) AS bird_happiness_max FROM birds WHERE bird_name IS NOT NULL) AS sq
      ) AS check_columns, parameters: None
    [2023-07-04, 11:18:01 UTC] {sql.py:397} INFO - Record: [('bird_name', 'null_check', 0), ('bird_name', 'distinct_check', 4), ('observation_year', 'max', 2022), ('bird_happiness', 'min', 8), ('bird_happiness', 'max', 10)]
    [2023-07-04, 11:18:01 UTC] {sql.py:420} INFO - All tests have passed
    ```

## How it works

> The SQL check operators are versions of the `SQLOperator` that abstract SQL queries to streamline data quality checks. One difference between the SQL check operators and the standard [`BaseSQLOperator`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/2.2.0/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.BaseSQLOperator) is that the SQL check operators respond with a boolean, meaning the task fails when any of the resulting queries fail. This is particularly helpful in stopping a data pipeline before bad data makes it to a given destination. The lines of code and values that fail the check are observable in the Airflow logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SQL check operators abstract SQL queries to streamline data quality checks. One difference between the SQL check operators and the standard [`BaseSQLOperator`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/2.2.0/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.BaseSQLOperator) is that the SQL check operators respond with a boolean, meaning the task fails when any of the resulting queries fail. This is particularly helpful for stopping a data pipeline before bad data makes it to a given destination. The lines of code and values that fail the check are observable in the Airflow logs.
```

The following SQL check operators are recommended for implementing data quality checks:

- **[`SQLColumnCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/modules/sqlcolumncheckoperator)**: Runs one or more predefined data quality checks on one or more columns within the same task.
- **[`SQLTableCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/modules/sqltablecheckoperator)**: Runs multiple user-defined checks which can involve one or more columns of a table.
- **[`SQLCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/modules/sqlcheckoperator)**: Takes any SQL query and returns a single row that is evaluated to booleans. This operator is useful for more complicated checks that could span several tables of your database.
- **[`SQLIntervalCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/modules/sqlintervalcheckoperator)**: Checks current data against historical data.

> Astronomer recommends using the `SQLColumnCheckOperator` and `SQLTableCheckOperator` over the older operators [`SQLValueCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/modules/sqlvaluecheckoperator) and [`SQLThresholdCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/modules/sqlthresholdcheckoperator) whenever possible to improve code readability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astronomer recommends using the `SQLColumnCheckOperator` and `SQLTableCheckOperator` over the older operators ([`SQLValueCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/modules/sqlvaluecheckoperator) and [`SQLThresholdCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/modules/sqlthresholdcheckoperator)) whenever possible to improve code readability.
```

> :::info
> 
> With the SQL check operators you have the foundation for a robust data quality suite right in your pipelines. If you are looking for more examples, or want to see how to use backend-specific operators like Redshift, BigQuery, or Snowflake, see the [data quality demo repository](https://github.com/astronomer/airflow-data-quality-demo/).
> 
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Dunno if we need this callout twice, especially since the first one is prominent at the beginning of the guide.

### SQLColumnCheckOperator

The `SQLColumnCheckOperator` has a `column_mapping` parameter which stores a dictionary of checks. Using this dictionary, it can run many checks within one task and still provide observability in the Airflow logs over which checks passed and which failed.

This operator is useful for:

- Ensuring all numeric values in a column are above a minimum, below a maximum or within a certain range (with or without a tolerance threshold).
- Null checks.
- Checking primary key columns for uniqueness.
- Checking the number of distinct values of a column.

> The `SQLColumnCheckOperator` offers 5 options for column checks which are abstractions over SQL statements:

Reviewer: How strongly do you feel about keeping this section? This feels less like a "How it works" and more like raw documentation of the operator. I could see us condensing this into a sentence or two instead of listing all possible options. Linking to the Airflow source code could be an alternative here.

    - **Connection Id**: `sqlite_conn`.
    - **Connection Type**: `SQLite`.
    - **Host**: `/tmp/sqlite.db`.

## Step 3: Add a SQL file with a custom check

1. In the `include` folder, create a file called `custom_check.sql`.

2. Copy and past the following SQL statement into the file:

  ```sql
  WITH all_combinations_unique AS (
  SELECT DISTINCT bird_name, observation_year AS combos_unique
    FROM '{{ params.table_name }}'
    )
  SELECT CASE
    WHEN COUNT(*) = COUNT(combos_unique) THEN 1
    ELSE 0
  END AS is_unique
  FROM '{{ params.table_name }}' JOIN all_combinations_unique;
  ```

  This SQL statement returns 1 if all combinations of `bird_name` and `observation_year` in a templated table are unique, and 0 if not.

## Step 4: Create a DAG using SQL check operators

1. Start Airflow by running `astro dev start`.

2. Create a new file in your `dags` folder called `sql_data_quality.py`.

3. Copy and paste the following DAG code into the file:

    <CodeBlock language="python">{sql_data_quality}</CodeBlock>

    This DAG creates and populates a small SQlite table `birds` with information about birds. Then, three tasks containing data quality checks are run on the table:

>     - The `column_checks` task uses the `SQLColumnCheckOperator`. The operator uses a operator-level [`partition_clause`](#partition_clause) which is `bird_name IS NOT NULL`. This means all checks contained in the `column_mapping` dictionary only run on rows where the `bird_name` column is not null. The `column_mapping` dictionary contains checks on all three columns:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - The `column_checks` task uses the `SQLColumnCheckOperator` to run the column-level checks provided to the `column_mapping` dictionary. The task also uses an operator-level [`partition_clause`](#partition_clause) to only run the checks on rows where the `bird_name` column is not null. 
```

>       - `bird_name`: This column is checked to not have any null values and at least 2 distinct values.

Reviewer 2: Do you think these bullets are necessary? I think the checks themselves in the column mapping are pretty self explanatory.

    
    - The `custom_check` task uses the `SQLCheckOperator`. This operator can run any SQL statement that returns a single row and will deem the data quality check failed if the that row contains any value [Python bool casting](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html) evaluates as `False`, for example `0`. Otherwise, the data quality check and the task will be marked as successful. This task will run the SQL statement in the file `include/custom_check.sql` on the `table_name` passed as a parameter. Note that in order to run SQL stored in a file, the path to the SQL file has to be added to the `template_searchpath` parameter of the DAG.

4. Open Airflow at `http://localhost:8080/`. Run the DAG manually by clicking the play button, then click the DAG name to view the DAG in the **Grid** view. All checks are set up to pass.

  ![Data quality check DAG grid view](/img/tutorials/airflow-sql-data-quality_dag_grid.png)

5. View the logs of the SQL check operators to get detailed information about the checks that were run and their results:

>     Logs for the `column_checks` task show the five individual checks that were run on three columns:

Reviewer 2: I do think it's helpful to have this step on viewing logs to highlight that info about the check results is published there, but I don't think we need to include logs for all three tasks. I would pick one to use as an example.

              FROM birds ) AS sq
        UNION ALL
        SELECT 'average_happiness_check' AS check_name, MIN(average_happiness_check) AS check_result
        FROM (SELECT CASE WHEN AVG(bird_happiness) >= 9 THEN 1 ELSE 0 END AS average_happiness_check
              FROM birds WHERE observation_year >= 2021) AS sq
        ) AS check_table, parameters: None
    [2023-07-04, 11:18:01 UTC] {sql.py:607} INFO - Record:
    [('row_count_check', 1), ('average_happiness_check', 1)]
    [2023-07-04, 11:18:01 UTC] {sql.py:625} INFO - All tests have passed
    ```

    Logs for the `custom_check` task shows the custom SQL statement that was run:

    ```text
    [2023-07-04, 11:18:01 UTC] {sql.py:374} INFO - Running statement: WITH all_combinations_unique AS (
      SELECT DISTINCT bird_name, observation_year AS combos_unique
      FROM 'birds'
      )
    SELECT CASE
      WHEN COUNT(*) = COUNT(combos_unique) THEN 1
      ELSE 0
    END AS is_unique
    FROM 'birds' JOIN all_combinations_unique;, parameters: None
    [2023-07-04, 11:18:01 UTC] {sql.py:710} INFO - Record: (1,)
    [2023-07-04, 11:18:01 UTC] {sql.py:716} INFO - Success.
    ```

> ## Conclusion

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Let's remove this section and add an info box in #How it works with the link to the demo repo

> With the SQL check operators you have the foundation for a robust data quality suite right in your pipelines. If you are looking for more examples, or want to see how to use backend-specific operators like Redshift, BigQuery, or Snowflake, see the [data quality demo repository](https://github.com/astronomer/airflow-data-quality-demo/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## How it works

The SQL check operators are versions of the `SQLOperator` that abstract SQL queries to streamline data quality checks. One difference between the SQL check operators and the standard [`BaseSQLOperator`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/2.2.0/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.BaseSQLOperator) is that the SQL check operators respond with a boolean, meaning the task fails when any of the resulting queries fail. This is particularly helpful in stopping a data pipeline before bad data makes it to a given destination. The lines of code and values that fail the check are observable in the Airflow logs.

The following SQL check operators are recommended for implementing data quality checks:

> - **[`SQLColumnCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/modules/sqlcolumncheckoperator)**: Runs multiple predefined data quality checks on multiple columns within the same task.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **[`SQLColumnCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/modules/sqlcolumncheckoperator)**: Runs one or more predefined data quality checks on one or more columns within the same task.
```

> - **[`SQLTableCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/modules/sqltablecheckoperator)**: Runs multiple user-defined checks on one or more columns of a table.

Reviewer 2: Is "one or more columns of a table" correct here? I thought TableCheck ran on the entire table?

- **[`SQLCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/modules/sqlcheckoperator)**: Takes any SQL query and returns a single row that is evaluated to booleans. This operator is useful for more complicated checks that could span several tables of your database.
- **[`SQLIntervalCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/modules/sqlintervalcheckoperator)**: Checks current data against historical data.

Additionally, two older SQL check operators exist that can run one check at a time against a defined value or threshold:

> - [`SQLValueCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/modules/sqlvaluecheckoperator): A simpler operator that can be used when a specific, known value is being checked either as an exact value or within a percentage threshold.

Reviewer 2: Since we're not recommending these, I would remove the extra text around what they do and just have one sentence that says something like  "We recommend using teh SQLValueCheckOperator and SQLThresholdCheckOperator over older SQL check operators X and Y, which result in less readable code"

- [`SQLThresholdCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/modules/sqlthresholdcheckoperator): An operator with flexible upper and lower thresholds, where the threshold bounds may also be described as SQL queries that return a numeric value.

> Astronomer recommends using the `SQLColumnCheckOperator` and `SQLTableCheckOperator` over the `SQLValueCheckOperator` and `SQLThresholdCheckOperator` whenever possible to improve code readability. Note that currently the operators cannot support BigQuery `job_id`s.

Reviewer 2: Which operators don't support BigQuery job IDs? Is it just the older ones? If yes, I think we can remove that comment since we're not recommending them. If it's also the newer ones, maybe we should put this note somewhere else?

- `leq_to` (lesser or equal than)
- `less_than`

Additionally, the SQLColumnCheckOperator:

> - Allows you to specify a tolerance to the comparisons in the form of a fraction (0.1 = 10% tolerance).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allows you to specify a tolerance to the comparisons as a fraction (0.1 = 10% tolerance).
```

> - Converts a returned `result` of `None` to 0 by default and still runs the check. For example, if a column check for the `MY_COL` column is set to accept a minimum value of -10 or more but runs on an empty table, the check would still pass because the `None` result is treated as 0. You can toggle this behavior by setting `accept_none=False`, which will cause all checks returning `None` to fail. In previous versions of the provider, running a column check on an empty table always resulted in a failed check.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Converts a returned `result` of `None` to 0 by default and still runs the check. For example, if a column check for the `MY_COL` column is set to accept a minimum value of -10 or more but runs on an empty table, the check would still pass because the `None` result is treated as 0. You can toggle this behavior by setting `accept_none=False`, which will cause all checks returning `None` to fail.
```

### SQLTableCheckOperator

The `SQLTableCheckOperator` provides a way to check the validity of user defined SQL statements which can involve one or more columns of a table. There is no limit to the amount of columns these statements can involve or to their complexity. The statements are provided to the operator as a dictionary with the `checks` parameter.

The `SQLTableCheckOperator` is useful for:

- Checks that include aggregate values using the whole table (e.g. comparing the average of one column to the average of another using the SQL `AVG()` function).
- Row count checks.
- Checking if a date is between certain bounds (for example, using `MY_DATE_COL BETWEEN '2019-01-01' AND '2019-12-31'` to make sure only dates in the year 2019 exist).
- Comparisons between multiple columns, both aggregated and not aggregated.

Similarly to the SQLColumnCheckOperator, you can pass a SQL `WHERE`-clause (without the `WHERE` keyword) to the operator-level [`partition_clause`](#partition_clause) parameter or as a check-level `partition_clause`.

### SQLCheckOperator

> The `SQLCheckOperator` returns a single row from a provided SQL query and checks to see if any of the returned values in that row are a value [Python bool casting](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html) evaluates as `False`, for example `0`. If any values are `False`, the task fails. This operator allows a great deal of flexibility in checking:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `SQLCheckOperator` returns a single row from a provided SQL query and checks to see if any of the returned values in that row are a value that [Python bool casting](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html) evaluates as `False`, for example `0`. If any values are `False`, the task fails. This operator lets you check:
```

- A specific, single column value.
- Part of or an entire row compared to a known set of values.
- Options for categorical variables and data types.
- The results of any other function that can be written as a SQL query.

> The target table for the `SQLCheckOperator` has to be specified within the SQL statement. The `sql` parameter of this operator can be either a complete SQL query as a string or, as in this turtorial example, a reference to a query stored in a local file. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The target table for the `SQLCheckOperator` has to be specified within the SQL statement. The `sql` parameter of this operator can be either a complete SQL query as a string or, as in this tutorial, a reference to a query stored in a local file. 
```

### `partition_clause`

> When using the SQLColumnCheckOperator and SQLTableCheckOperator, you can run checks on a subset of your table using either a check-level or task-level `partition_clause` parameter. This parameter takes a SQL `WHERE`-clause (without the `WHERE` keyword) and uses it to filter your table before running a given check or group of checks in a task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the SQLColumnCheckOperator and SQLTableCheckOperator, you can run checks on a subset of your table using either a check-level or task-level `partition_clause` parameter. This parameter takes a SQL `WHERE`-clause (without the `WHERE` keyword) and uses it to filter your table before running a given check or group of checks in a task.
```

- `leq_to` (lesser or equal than)
- `less_than`

Additionally, the SQLColumnCheckOperator:

> - allows you to specify a tolerance to the comparisons in the form of a fraction (0.1 = 10% tolerance).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Allows you to specify a tolerance to the comparisons in the form of a fraction (0.1 = 10% tolerance).
```

> - converts a returned `result` of `None` to 0 by default and still runs the check. For example, if a column check for the `MY_COL` column is set to accept a minimum value of -10 or more but runs on an empty table, the check would still pass because the `None` result is treated as 0. You can toggle this behavior by setting `accept_none=False`, which will cause all checks returning `None` to fail. In previous versions of the provider, running a column check on an empty table always resulted in a failed check.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Converts a returned `result` of `None` to 0 by default and still runs the check. For example, if a column check for the `MY_COL` column is set to accept a minimum value of -10 or more but runs on an empty table, the check would still pass because the `None` result is treated as 0. You can toggle this behavior by setting `accept_none=False`, which will cause all checks returning `None` to fail. In previous versions of the provider, running a column check on an empty table always resulted in a failed check.
```

> - accepts an operator-level `partition_clause` parameter that allows you to run checks on a subset of your table. See the [partition_clause](#partition_clause) section for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Accepts an operator-level `partition_clause` parameter that allows you to run checks on a subset of your table. See the [partition_clause](#partition_clause) section for more information.
```
